Prayer to the Lineage of Parting from the Four Attachments
by Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo

Namaḥ śrī gurave!
drowé lama tönpa dzok sangyé
Guru and guide to living beings, perfectly awakened Buddha,
gyalsé tuwo gönpo jampé yang
Foremost of buddha’s heirs, gentle-voiced protector Mañjughoṣa,
dé yi jezung jetsün sakyapa
And the one for whom he cared, precious Sakyapa master1—
kyab chok tsungmé sum la solwa deb
To these three supreme and incomparable sources of refuge, I pray!

rigpé né nga tarchin sönam tsé
Sönam Tsemo,2 who mastered the five sciences completely,
dogyü künkhyen jetsün rinpoche
Jetsün Rinpoche,3 who fully understood both sūtra and tantra,
tubwang nyipa sakya pandita
And the second lord of sages, Sakya Paṇḍita4—
gyalwé gyaltsab sum la solwa deb
To these three regents of the victorious ones, I pray!

tenpé ngadak pakpa rinpoche
Chögyal Pakpa Rinpoche,5 who was a sovereign of the teachings,
tö sam gompé gyü chuk könchok pal
Könchok Pal,6 whose mind was rich with study, contemplation and meditation,
ngödrub chok nyé chöjé drakpuk pa
And Chöje Drakpukpa,7 who gained supreme accomplishment—
khedrub dampa sum la solwa deb
To these three learned and accomplished saints, I pray!

kyegü tsukgyen sönam gyaltsen pal
Sönam Gyaltsen,8 who was an adornment for the crowns of beings,
dampé wangchuk palden tsultrim shyab
Palden Tsultrim,9 who was a mighty lord of practical instruction,
tamché khyenpa yeshe gyaltsen té
And Yeshe Gyaltsen,10 who mastered all there is to know—
dren chok lama sum la solwa deb
To these three supreme guides and gurus, I pray!

palden lamé tsok la soldeb kyi
As I pray to these, the hosts of glorious gurus,
nyur gyok tukjé chen gyi lek zik né
May they gaze upon me swiftly with eyes of compassion,
pung trol shyi gyur tsé di nangwa la
And grant their blessings so that I wholeheartedly abandon
shyenpa tingné lokpar jingyi lob
Attachment for the appearances of this life, the basis of ruin!

chungzé tsam yang dewé kabmé ching
Since there is not even the slightest occasion for happiness,
zö ké dukngal shintu mizepé
And suffering is so unbearable and difficult to endure,
gyündu dungjé kham sum khorwa lé
Grant your blessings so that I generate intense renunciation
ngejung drakpo kyewar jingyi lob
For the continuous torment of saṃsāra’s three realms!

sé ché gyalwé dröpa chikpé lam
Grant your blessings so that through cultivating bodhicitta,
dakshyen nyam dang jewé changchub sem
Based on the equalizing and exchange of myself and others,
magyur drowé döndu lek gompé
Which is the single path taken by the buddhas and their heirs,
rangdön yi jé dralwar jingyi lob
I may rid myself of thoughts and attitudes of selfish concern!

chö kün döné milam gyuma tar
Grant your blessings so that through deciding that all phenomena
nang yang denpé tongpé takchö né
Are primordially dream-like and illusory, apparent yet unreal,
chok dzin kündral zungjuk umé lam
The path of the middle way of unity beyond clinging to extremes
yangdak gyü la kyewar jingyi lob
May arise authentically in my mind!

Thus, the Śākya bhikṣu, Kunga Zangpo, wrote this prayer to the lineage of gurus for the instruction
of Parting from the Four Attachments at the great Dharma centre of glorious Sakya.
May virtue and excellence flourish!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.
↑ Kunga Nyingpo (Kun dga’ snying po, 1092–1158).↑ bSod nams rtse mo, 1142–1182.↑ Drakpa Gyaltsen
(Grags pa rgyal mtshan, 1147–1216).↑ Kunga Gyaltsen (Kun dga’ rgyal mtshan, 1182–1251).↑
Lodrö Gyaltsen (Blo gros rgyal mtshan, 1235–1280).↑ Zhangtön Könchok Pal (Zhang ston dkon
mchog dpal, d.1317).↑ Sönam Pal (bSod nams dpal, 1277–1350).↑ Lama Dampa Sönam Gyaltsen
(bSod nams rgyal mtshan, 1312–1375).↑ dPal ldan tshul khrims, 1333–1399.↑ Sharchen Yeshe
Gyaltsen (shar chen ye shes rgyal mtshan, 1359–1406).