Instruction on Parting from the Four Attachments

by Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyaltsen

I prostrate at the feet of the noble lama!

Having obtained a body with all the freedoms and advantages, encountered the precious teachings
of the Buddha, and genuinely aroused the right attitude, now we need to put the Dharma
into practice without any mistake. For this, we must take to heart and practise the ‘Parting
from the Four Attachments’.

What exactly does this imply?

—not being attached to the present life;—not being attached to the three realms of saṃsāra;—not
being attached to your own self-interest;—and not clinging to some true reality in things
and their characteristics.

To explain this further:

It is futile to be attached to this life, since it is like a bubble on water, and the time of
our death uncertain.

These three realms of saṃsāra are like a poisonous fruit, delicious at first, but ultimately
harmful. Anyone who is attached to them must be deluded.

Attachment to your own self-interest is like nurturing the child of an enemy. It may bring joy
at first, but in the end only leads to ruin. Just so, attachment to your own welfare brings
happiness in the short term, but eventually leads you to the lower realms.

Clinging to true existence in things and their characteristics is like perceiving water in a
mirage. For a moment it looks like water, but there is nothing there to drink. This saṃsāric
existence does appear to the deluded mind, yet when it is examined with discriminating
awareness, nothing, nothing at all, is found to have any intrinsic existence. So, having
come to an understanding where your mind does not dwell in the past, the future, or the present,
you should recognize all phenomena as naturally free from any conceptual complexity.

If you act in this way,—by relinquishing attachment to this life, there will be no more rebirth
in the lower realms,—by relinquishing attachment to the three realms of saṃsāra, there
will be no more rebirth in saṃsāric existence,—by relinquishing attachment to your own self-interest,
there will be no more rebirths as a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha.—finally, through
abandoning any clinging to reality in things and their characteristics, you will swiftly
attain complete and perfect buddhahood.

This completes Sakya Paṇḍita’s unerring instruction on the ‘Parting from the Four Attachments’,
the enlightened intent of the glorious Sachen Kunga Nyingpo.

| Rigpa Translations, 2011.