The Seven Points of Mind Training

by Geshe Chekawa Yeshe Dorje (1101–1175)

1. The Preliminaries

First, train in the preliminaries.

2. The Main Practice

Consider all things and events as dreamlike.Examine the nature of unborn awareness.Let even
the antidote be freed in its own place.Rest in the ālaya, the essence.Between sessions, be
a conjurer of illusions.

Train in the two—giving and taking—alternately.These two are to be mounted on the breath.Three
objects, three poisons and three sources of virtue.In all activities, train by applying
slogans.Begin the process of taking with yourself.

3. Transforming Adversity into the Path of Enlightenment

When all the world is filled with evil,transform adversity into the path of enlightenment.Drive
all blames into one.Meditate on the great kindness of all.Meditating on delusory perceptions
as the four kāyas.Is the unsurpassable śūnyatā protection.The fourfold practice is
the best of methods.Whatever you encounter, apply the practice.

4. Applying the Practice throughout the Whole of Life

The essence of the instruction, briefly stated,is to apply yourself to the five strengths.The
mahāyāna advice for transferenceInvolves the same five strengths. Conduct is important.


5. The Measure of Mind Training

All teachings share a single purpose.Of the two witnesses, rely upon the principal one.Always
maintain only a joyful attitude.If this can be done even when distracted, you are proficient.

6. The Commitments of Mind Training

Train constantly in three basic principles.Change your attitude, but remain natural.Don’t speak
of injured limbs.Don’t ponder others’ flaws.Train first with the strongest destructive
emotions.Abandon any expectations of results.Give up poisonous food.Don’t be so loyal to
the cause.Don’t lash out in retaliation.Don’t lie in ambush.Don’t strike a vulnerable point.Don’t
transfer the ox’s burden to the cow.Don’t be competitive.Don’t misperform the rites.Don’t
reduce gods to demons.Don’t seek others’ misery as crutches of your own happiness.


7. The Precepts of Mind Training

Do everything with a single intention.Counter all adversity with a single remedy.Two tasks:
one at the beginning and one at the end.Whichever of the two occurs, be patient.Keep the two,
even at your life’s expense.Train in the three difficulties.Acquire the three main provisions.Cultivate
the three that must not decline.Keep the three from which you must not separate.Apply
the training impartially to all.It is vital that it be deep and all-pervasive.Meditate
constantly on those who’ve been set apart.Don’t be dependent on external conditions.This
time, practise what’s most important.Don’t misunderstand.Don’t be inconsistent.Train
wholeheartedly.Gain freedom through discernment and analysis.Don’t be boastful.Don’t
be irritable.Don’t be temperamental.Don’t seek acknowledgement.

The essence of the nectar-like instructions for transforming into the path of awakening the
five prevalent signs of degeneration was passed down from the one from Golden Isle. When karmic
seeds left over from former trainings were aroused in me, I felt great interest, and
so, without regard for suffering or disparagement, I sought instructions on subduing ego-clinging.
Now, even in death, I shall have no regrets.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2012.