Supplement to the Omniscient Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo’s Prayer to the Lineage of Parting from the
Four Attachments
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

After the line “To these three supreme guides and gurus, I pray!” continue with:
gyalwé lungten künkhyen ewam pa
Omniscient Evaṃpa,1 whom the victorious one prophesied,
dé sé tuwo könchok gyaltsen pal
Foremost among his heirs, glorious Könchok Gyaltsen,2
mawé nyima sönam sengé té
And Sönam Senge,3 sun of speech—
rik drol tarchin sum la solwa deb
To these three masters of knowledge and liberation, I pray!

jampé yang ngö sangye rinchen dang
Sangye Rinchen,4 who was Mañjughoṣa in person,
sempa chenpo namkha wangchuk shyab
The great noble being Namkha Wangchuk,5
lung rik ngadak künga lekdrub té
And Kunga Lekdrup,6 sovereign of scripture and reasoning—
tenpé saljé sum la solwa deb
To these three luminaries of the teachings, I pray!

rigpar mawa künga chödrak dang
The logician Kunga Chödrak,7
drubpé wangchuk künga nampar gyal
Lord of siddhas, Kunga Namgyal,8
khyen rab tarchin tendzin zangpo té
And perfectly wise Tendzin Zangpo—9
namdren dampa sum la solwa deb
To these three noble guides, I pray!

khé shing drub nyé ngawang lhündrub dang
Ngawang Lhundrup,10 who gained learning and accomplishment,
künzik chö kyi nyima morchen jé
Lord Morchen,11 all-seeing sun of Dharma,
dampa gyamtso jungné nésar wa
And Nesarpa,12 source of oceanic instruction—
tsungmé lama sum la solwa deb
To these three incomparable gurus, I pray!

nyikdü tenpé sokshing künlö shyab
Kunga Lodrö,13 vital pillar for the teachings in the age of degeneration,
jetsün chimé tenpé nyima dang
Noble lady Chimé Tenpé Nyima,14
jampal shyönnu dorjé rinchen té
And youthful Mañjuśrī Dorje Rinchen—15
kyegü drenchok sum la solwa deb
To these three sublime leaders of beings, I pray!

jampé tukjé sé ché gyalwa kün
With loving compassion, all the buddhas and their heirs,
lhar ché gawé tendzin chok gi kur
Arose as a holder of the teachings to delight even the gods—
yong shar kyabné gyamtso daknyi ché
Great embodiment of oceanic sources of refuge,
khenchen tamché khyenpar solwa deb
Omniscient Khenchen, to you I pray!16

Then continue with “As I pray to these, the hosts of glorious gurus...etc.”

Thus, the renunciant monk Khyentse Wangpo wrote this in Pende Kunkhyab Ling, the lama’s residence
at glorious Lhundrup Teng. Śubhaṃ.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.
↑ i.e., Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo (ngor chen kun dga’ bzang po, 1382–1456).↑ dKon mchog rgyal mtshan,
1388–1469.↑ Gorampa Sönam Senge (go rams pa bsod nams seng ge, 1429–1489).↑ Müchen Sangye
Rinchen (Mus chen sangs rgyas rin chen, 1450–1524).↑ Nam mkha’ dbang phyug, dates unknown.↑
Kun dga’ legs grub, dates unknown.↑ Jampa Kunga Chödrak (Byams pa kun dga’ chos grags,
dates unknown).↑ Kun dga’ rnam rgyal, dates unknown.↑ Khyenrab Tenzin Zangpo (mkhyen
rab bstan ’dzin bzang po, dates unknown).↑ Ngag dbang lhun grub (1633–1703).↑ Kunga Lhundrup,
(Kun dga’ lhun grub, 1654–1726).↑ Kunga Lekpé Jungne (Kun dga’ legs pa’i ‘byung gnas,
1704–1760).↑ Kun dga’ blo gros, dates unknown.↑ Jetsünma Chimé Tenpé Nyima, (rJe btsun ma
‘chi med bstan pa’i nyi ma, b. 1756).↑ rDo rje rin chen, 1819–1867.↑ This verse is addressed
to Jampa Tendzin Nyendrak (byams pa bstan ’dzin snyan grags, d. 1885?)  from whom Jamyang
Khyentse Wangpo received this instruction.