Translator’s Introduction

Few figures in the transmission of the Dharma from India to Tibet hold as central of a role
as the great master Atiśa Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna (982–1055?). Often referred to in Tibetan simply
by the epithet of “Lord” (Tib. jo bo rje), Atiśa is the individual most associated with
the eleventh-century revival of Buddhism in Tibet, which followed the tumultuous era of
fragmentation (sil bu’i dus) that began with the 842 collapse of the Tibetan Empire. His impact
on the Tibetan Buddhist Dharma continues to reverberate to this day, nearly a full millennium
after he first arrived in the Land of Snows, and his teachings have inspired millions
of Buddhists in Central Asia and now the world over. A brief introduction to his life
and activities may shed light on this foundational text.

Read more

function show_intro() {	document.getElementById('intro-readmore').style.display='none';	var
e = document.getElementById('intro-hidden');	e.style.height = e.scrollHeight + "px";	return
false;}		

Atiśa was born in 982 as the second son of a royal house in Bengal, eastern India. On the eve
of an adolescent marriage, he experienced a powerful vision of Tārā that motivated him to
renounce the worldly life, even at this young age, and embark on the Buddhist path. He wandered
through the jungles and mountains of India seeking the instruction of Buddhist masters,
and he is said to have studied under a great number of mahāsiddhas. There are also accounts
that he may have practiced the tantric sexual yogas at this time.[1] He received the
bodhisattva vows from the master Bodhibhadra at the great Indian monastic university of
Nālandā. At twenty-nine, the same age that Siddhartha left the palace, Atiśa had a dream
in which he was urged by the Buddha himself to ordain, prompting him to take full monastic
vows at a monastery in Bodh Gaya. Upon ordination, he was given the name Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna,
“He Whose Deep Awareness Acts as a Lamp.” With his relatively late ordination and scholarly
pursuits, Atiśa’s biography is an inverse of Indian mahāsiddhas such as Nāropa, who
only disrobed to practice tantra after many years living as a pure monk and scholar. Atiśa’s
full monastic ordination after nearly two decades spent as a wandering yogi demonstrates
the tremendous esteem with which he held the Vinaya and monastic discipline, values reflected
in the Lamp for the Path and his broader missionary activities in Tibet. Atiśa’s most
important teacher is referred to in Tibetan texts as Serlingpa (“The One from the Golden
Island, Suvarṇadvīpa”), the Indonesian teacher also known as Suvarṇadvīpa Dharmakīrti. Atiśa
heard tell of this great master of bodhicitta and resolved to undertake the perilous ocean
journey to meet him and receive his teachings. He spent many tumultuous months at sea,
rife with danger and obstacles, before he finally crossed the Strait of Malacca and arrived
at the island of Sumatra where he met the sublime master. Atiśa remained on the island
for twelve years, training intensively in bodhicitta and mind training (blo sbyong). He then
returned to India as a lineage holder of Serlingpa’s precious teachings and later served
as the abbot the great monastic university Vikramaśīla. In Tibet, he declared that of his
forty-five teachers, Serlingpa was the most important; his numerous biographies report
that the mere mention of Serlingpa’s name caused Atiśa’s eyes to brim with tears. The story
of Atiśa’s invitation to Tibet is one of the most legendary in the Buddhist history of the
country. Toward the end of the tenth century, the king of the Western Tibetan kingdom of
Purang-Guge (pu hrangs gu ge), Lha Lama Yeshe Ö, sent twenty-one young Tibetans to Kashmir
with the aim of reviving uncorrupted Buddhist teachings in his kingdom. This was prompted
by the belief that Buddhism had fallen into a state of intense moral decay with the collapse
of the Tibetan empire. Nineteen of the youths perished on the journey, marking the first
of many supreme sacrifices required to bring Atiśa’s pure Dharma to Tibet. One of the
two young men who survived was the great translator Rinchen Zangpo (958–1055), who informed
the king of master Atiśa, whose fame had spread from eastern India all the way to the western
mountains of Kashmir. The king sent a mission of nine men with a sizable offering of
gold to Vikramaśīla to implore Atiśa to come to Tibet and restore the Buddhadharma. Only
one of the nine survived the treacherous journey across the Himalayas and into India, but
Atiśa declined the invitation and gold, saying it was important he remain in India. While
amassing even more gold with which to invite the master, King Yeshe Ö was captured by the
ardently anti-Buddhist Karluk (Qarluq) people, who said that the king’s freedom could only
be bought for his own weight in gold. His nephew Jangchub Ö raised the requisite fortune
for the king’s release only to have Yeshe Ö tell him to use the gold to again invite Atiśa,
now with the message that the king had sacrificed his very life to bring the master to
Tibet.[2] When Atiśa heard the story of the king’s supreme sacrifice, and on being urged directly
by the goddess Tārā herself, he accepted the invitation and departed for Tibet, where
he would remain for the rest of his life. The present text, The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment,
is a masterpiece of Buddhist literature. As noted in the first and final verses,
Atiśa composed the treatise at the urging of Jangchub Ö, who became king following his
uncle’s death. The text fully integrates the three vehicles of the Buddha’s teachings and
shows them to be entirely non-contradictory. Doboom Tulku and Glenn Mullin note that “it
is largely due to [Atiśa] that today all Tibetan sects of Buddhism are a combination of Hinayana,
general Mahayana and Vajrayana doctrines.”[3] The great nineteenth-century master
Dza Patrul Rinpoche wrote that although Atiśa had full mastery over the entire range of Buddhist
teachings, sūtra and tantra, the foundational practice of taking refuge was of such
paramount importance to him that Tibetans nicknamed him the ‘Refuge Paṇḍita.’[4] Atiśa’s
masterwork is the foundational text for the “stages of the path” (lam rim) genre so prominent
in Tibetan Buddhist literature. Gampopa’s Jeweled Ornament of Liberation (dam chos yid
bzhin nor bu thar pa rin po che’i rgyan), Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise on the Stages of the
Path (lam rim chen mo), and Longchenpa’s Finding Rest in the Nature of Mind (sems nyid
ngal gso), seminal classics of the Kagyü, Gelug, and Nyingma schools respectively, all draw
their basic framework from Atiśa's Lamp for the Path. Given that this is one of the most
foundational texts in Tibetan Buddhism, one which shaped the tradition as we know it today,
it is a great honour to present this English translation.[5] May it be of benefit!Further
Reading (in English)Apple, James B. Atisa Dipamkara: Illuminator of the Awakened Mind.
Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications, 2019. Doboom Tulku and Glenn H. Mullin. Atisha and Buddhism
in Tibet. New Delhi: Tibet House, 1983.Gardner, Alexander. "Atiśa Dīpaṃkara," Treasury
of Lives, accessed March 26, 2021, http://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Atisa-Dipamkara/5717.Laird,
Thomas. The Story of Tibet: Conversations with the Dalai Lama. “Chapter
5: The Dharma Returns, and Buddhist Orders Are Born, 978-1204.” New York: Grove Press,
2007.The Dalai Lama. Illuminating the Path to Enlightenment. Trans. Geshe Thupten Jinpa. Eds.
Rebecca McClen Novick, Thubten Jinpa and Nicolas Ribush. Long Beach, CA: Thubten Dhargye
Ling, 2002. Mullin, Glenn H. The Fourteen Dalai Lamas: A Sacred Legacy of Reincarnation.
Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers, 2001: 13.  ↩His Holiness the Dalai Lama recounts how,
as a child, he saw the headless body of King Yeshe Ö preserved in salt in the Potala.
See Laird: 2007: 71.  ↩Atisha and Buddhism in Tibet. New Delhi: Tibet House, 1983: 71.  ↩rdza
dpal sprul rin po che. rdzogs pa chen po klong chen snying thig gi sngon ’gro’i khrid
yig kun bzang bla ma’i zhal lung. New Delhi: chos spyod par skrun khang, 2013: 260.  ↩The
translator was fortunate to receive the oral transmission and instructions on this text during
a public teaching given by His Holiness the Dalai Lama in Choglamsar, Ladakh in the summer
of 2016. I am grateful to Dr. Jules Levinson, who graciously allowed me to attend his
course based largely on this text in winter 2020. While translating, I referred to previous
translations by David Choephel, Richard Sherburne and Ruth Sonam. I am grateful for the
careful edits and feedback on the translation provided by Lowell Cook and Adam Pearcey.
↩

The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment

by Atiśa Dīpaṃkara

In the language of India: BodhipāthapradipaṃIn the language of Tibet: jangchup lam gyi drönma
(byang chub lam gyi sgron ma)In the English language: The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment


Homage to the youthful bodhisattva Mañjuśrī!

With great reverence, I prostrate to all the Victorious Ones of the three times,to their Dharma,
and to the members of the Saṅgha.Urged by my good student Jangchup Ö,I shall elucidate
the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.

Understand there are three types of individuals—lesser, middling, and superior.I shall set out
a system of classification in whichtheir respective characteristics are made completely
clear.

Know that those who, by whatever means,exclusively seek mere mundane pleasuresof saṃsāra for
their own benefitare inferior individuals.

Those who have turned their backs on saṃsāra’s pleasuresand refrain from sinful karma,striving
merely for pacification for themselves alone—such individuals are said to be middling.


Those who truly desire to completely eradicateall the suffering of othersthrough their own personal
suffering—such individuals are supreme.

For these noble beingswho desire supreme enlightenment,I shall explain the perfect methodstaught
by spiritual teachers.

In the presence of paintings, statues,stūpas, and other representations of the perfect Buddha,offer
flowers, fragrant incense,and whatever else you can afford.

With the seven-fold offering alsotaught in Samantabhadra’s Aspiration to Good Deeds,and with
the thought never to turn backuntil attaining the essence of complete enlightenment,

With fervent faith in the Three Jewels,place one knee on the ground,join the palms together,and
first take refuge three times.

Then, beginning with a mind of lovefor all sentient beings,consider all those, without exception,who
suffer in the three lower realmsfrom birth, death, and so forth.

With the wish to liberate all beingsfrom the suffering of suffering,from suffering and its causes,generate
bodhicitta with irreversible resolve.

Maitreya has thoroughly explainedthe qualities of generatingsuch aspirational bodhicittain the
Sūtra of the Arrayed Tree.[1]

Having understood the limitless qualitiesof the mind of complete enlightenmentfrom reading this
sūtra or listening to a spiritual teacher,generate this very state of mind again and again.


The Sūtra Requested by Vīradattathoroughly explains its merits.Here, I shall summarize themby
citing only three verses:

“If the merit of bodhicittawere to take physical form,even the whole of space itselfcould not
contain its vastness.

“If a person were to fill with jewelsas many buddhafields as there aregrains of sands in the
Ganges Riverand offer them to the Protector of the World,

“This would be far surpassed by the offeringof someone joining their hands togetherand bowing
in their mind to enlightenment,for this is beyond any limit.”

You should generate aspirational bodhicittaand constantly increase it through great exertion.You
should fully uphold your precepts as instructedso that you may recollect this in other
lifetimes as well.

Without the actual vow of engaged bodhicitta,your perfect aspiration will not develop further.With
the wish to develop perfect enlightenment,make effort to take the vow in full.

Only those who continuously maintainone of the seven types of individual liberation vowsor other
vows will have the fortune forthe bodhisattva vow, no one else.

According to the Tathāgata’s explanation ofthe seven classes of vows of individual liberation,glorious
pure conduct—celibacy—is said to be supreme.Take, therefore, the vows of full ordination.


According to the ritual described in thediscipline chapter of The Bodhisattva Levels,you should
take the vow from a good,authentically qualified spiritual teacher.

Understand that a good spiritual teacheris one skilled in the vow ritual,who lives by the vow
and possessesthe patience and compassion to bestow it.

In case, after searching for someone like this,you are unable to find such a spiritual teacher,I
shall explain another ritualwith which to properly take the vow.

With utmost clarity, I shall write howlong ago, when he was Ambarāja,Mañjuśrī generated bodhicitta,as
described in The Ornament of Mañjuśrī’sBuddhafield Sūtra.

“In the presence of the Protectors,I generate the mind of perfect enlightenment,and I invite
all beings as my guests—These I shall liberate from saṃsāra.

“From this moment untilI achieve supreme enlightenment,I shall have no thoughts of harm,no anger,
avarice, or jealousy.

“I shall cultivate pure conduct,and abandon sin and craving.With joy for the vows of discipline,I
shall train to emulate the Buddhas.

“Taking no joy in swiftlyattaining enlightenment for myself,I will remain until the very endfor
the sake of even a single being.

“I shall prepare immeasurable,inconceivable realmsand will remain in the ten directionsfor any
who call out my name.

“Having purified allphysical and verbal actions,I shall also purify my mental activities,and
will avoid all that is non-virtuous.”

Completely pure body, speech, and mindcause you to maintain the actual vow of engaged bodhicitta.By
properly practicing the discipline of the three trainings,your reverence for these
trainings grows greater.

Therefore, by exerting yourself in the bodhisattva vows,bent on pure and perfect enlightenment,the
accumulations for complete enlightenmentwill be fully perfected.

All Buddhas say that the causefor completing the accumulations,whose natures are merit and wisdom,is
the development of the higher knowledges.

Just as a bird with unfledged wingscannot fly through the sky,one who lacks the power of the
higher knowledgeswill be unable to work for beings’ benefit.

The merit of a single day and nightgained by one with the higher knowledgesis not attained within
a hundred lifetimesby one who is without them.

Those who desire to swiftly completethe accumulations for perfect enlightenmentwill accomplish
the higher knowledgesthrough effort, not through laziness.

The higher knowledges will not arisewithout the accomplishment of śamatha;therefore, strive
again and againto accomplish calm abiding.

As long as the requisites for śamathaare weak, even if you were to meditatewith great effort
for thousands of years,still you would not accomplish samādhi.

Therefore, maintaining the requisitestaught in the Collection of Samādhi Chapter,place your
mind on any suitablevirtuous object of focus.

When the practitioner achieves śamatha,higher knowledges are also attained.But without the practice
of the perfection of wisdom,the obscurations will not be eliminated.

Therefore, in order to abandon, without exception,all emotional and cognitive obscurations,constantly
meditate on the practiceof the perfection of wisdom with skillful means.

Wisdom without skillful meansand skillful means without wisdomare said to be a form of bondage.Therefore,
do not relinquish either one.

To eliminate doubts concerningwhat is wisdom and what are skillful means,I shall clarify the
correct distinctionbetween skillful means and wisdom.

With the exception of the perfection of wisdom,the accumulations of all virtuous actions,such
as the perfections of generosity and so forth,are described as skillful means by the Victorious
Ones.

Whosoever cultivates wisdomthrough the power of cultivating skillful meanswill swiftly attain
enlightenment—but not through meditation on selflessness alone.

What we call ‘wisdom’ is thoroughly explainedas an understanding of the emptiness of inherent
existence—the realization that the aggregates, elements,and sense sources are unproduced.


Logically, something existent cannot be produced,nor can something nonexistent, like a sky-flower.Consequently,
as both faults would apply,something which is both could likewise not
come into being.

An entity is not produced from itself,nor from something else, nor from both,nor without causes.
Therefore,it has no inherent nature.

Alternatively, when you analyze any phenomenonas to whether it is singular or multiple,no inherent
nature is observed.Phenomena are thus determined to have no nature.

The reasoning in The Seventy Verses on Emptiness,[2]The Root Verses on the Middle Way,[3] and
so forth,explains how it is proven thatthe nature of all things is emptiness.

As this text would become too long,I have not elaborated further here.In order to facilitate
your meditation,I will fully explain only the established conclusions.

Thus, any meditation on selflessnessin which you do not observe the inherent natureof any phenomena,
without exception,is, in and of itself, the cultivation of wisdom.

Just as wisdom sees no inherent naturein any phenomena whatsoever,let wisdom itself be subject
to analysis,and meditate free from conceptuality.

The nature of this existence,which arises from conceptuality, is conceptuality.Therefore, to
abandon conceptualityin its entirety is supreme nirvāṇa.

Accordingly, the Blessed One said,“The great ignorance of conceptualityplunges us into the ocean
of saṃsāra.Resting in non-conceptual samādhi,non-conceptuality is as clear as the sky.”


Similarly, in The Dhāraṇī of Entering Non-Conceptuality:[4]“If the heirs of the Victorious Onescontemplate,
without concepts, this noble Dharma,they will transcend conceptuality, so
hard to overcome,and eventually attain the state of non-conceptuality.”

After gaining certainty from scripturesand reasoning that all phenomenaare unproduced and without
inherent nature,meditate without conceptuality.

Accordingly, from meditating on suchness,eventually, you will attain heat and other signs;“Supreme
Joy” and the other bhūmis will be attained;And Buddhahood, the enlightened state, will
not be far away.

If you wish to fully perfect the accumulationsfor enlightenment with ease,through pacifying,
enriching, and the other activitiesaccomplished by the mantric powers;

through the power of eight great accomplishments;through accomplishing the “fine vase” and others—If
you wish to take up the practice of Secret Mantraas taught in the action, conduct,
and other tantras,

then, in order to receive empowermentfrom a vajra master, you must please thenoble spiritual
teacher through veneration,offerings of wealth and the like,and endeavouring to carry out
all commands.

Through the complete bestowal of the vajra master empowermentby a spiritual master whom you
have delighted,you will be completely purified of all sinsand gain the fortune of accomplishing
the siddhis.

As The Great Tantra of the Primordial Buddhaemphatically forbids it,those observing celibacy
should neverreceive the secret and wisdom empowerments.

If those practicing celibacy and asceticismwere to receive those empowerments,they would be
obliged to practice what is forbidden,and their vows of austerity would thus deteriorate.


This creates a downfall which woulddefeat those practicing yogic discipline.As they would be
certain to fall into the lower realms,they would never gain accomplishment.

For those who have received the vajra master empowermentand have knowledge of suchness, there
is no faultin receiving or teaching any tantra,performing fire pūjās, offerings, and so
forth.

At the urging of Jangchub Ö,I, the Elder Dīpaṃkara Śrī, have conciselyexplained the Path of
Enlightenment,as I’ve seen it taught in the sūtras and other Dharma teachings.

This concludes The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, composed by the great master Dīpaṃkara
Śrījñāna. It was translated and finalized by the great Indian abbot himself and the great
translator and editor Gewé Lodrö. This teaching was composed in the Toling Temple in Zhang
Zhung.

| Translated by Patrick Dowd, 2021.

Source: a ti sha , a ti sha , dge ba'i blo gros . "byang chub lam gyi sgron ma/." In bstan 'gyur/
(dpe bsdur ma). TBRC W1PD95844. 64: 1678 - 1686. pe cin/: krung go'i bod rig pa'i dpe
skrun khang /, 1994-2008. http://tbrc.org/link?RID=O2MS16391|O2MS163914CZ190227$W1PD95844

Skt. Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtra, Tib. sdong po bkod pa’i mdo.  ↩Skt. Śūnyatāsaptatikārikā, Tib. stong
nyid bdun bcu pa.  ↩Skt. Prajñā-nāma-mūlamadhyamakakārikā, Tib. dbu ma rtsa ba shes rab. 
↩Skt. Avikalpapraveśadhāraṇī, Tib. rnam par mi rtog par ‘jug pa’i gzungs.  ↩