The Sweet-Sounding Song that Fulfils All Aims
A Prayer to Noble Tārā Combined with Her Root Mantra
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā

om gyi tar dang dögü nor ter
With Oṃ the jewel of liberation and all that could be wished for is bestowed.
pal dang yang sok kalpa zangpö
With the excellence of splendour, prosperity and the like,
sishyir men dzé sangwa sum dak
You bring healing to existence and peace, mistress of the three secrets,
chok jin pakma yum la dü do
Noble Mother of perfect generosity, to you I pay homage!

taré tukkyé rinchen druwö
With Tāre, the precious vessel of bodhicitta,
khorwa ngensong dukngal tso lé
You constantly liberate living beings, who are in number as extensive as space,
khanyam yichen taktu drolwé
From the ocean of suffering in cyclic existence and the lower realms.
jetsün drolma yum la dü do
Noble Mother Tārā, to you I pay homage!

tuttaré shyé jinlab dütsi
With Tuttāre, the ambrosia of blessings
jik ché güpé tsadung sal né
Banishes the tormenting heat of fear and misery,
pendé pemo gyepar dzepé
And causes the lotus of benefit and wellbeing to bloom.
dungwa kyob ma yum la dü do
To you Mother, who protects from distress, I pay homage!

turé khyö shyab drenpé mö né
Turé—the instant I remember you, Venerable One,
gang dul tsen dang ku yi köpé
With your display of attributes and forms to tame beings as appropriate,
dak té pongpa kün lé sungwé
You protect against all the misfortunes of belief in a self.
tukjé nyurma yum la dü do
I pay homage to you, compassionate and swift Mother.

soha trinlé dzokden trin gyi
Svāhā—bountiful clouds of enlightened activity
gelek norbü druchar bebpé
Rain down jewels of virtue and goodness
kham sum dro kün ukjin tsolwé
That bring relief to all beings of the three realms.
yishyin khorlo yum la dü do
I pay homage to you, Mother, Wish-Fulfilling Wheel.

dorna sé ché gyalwa yong kyi
In brief, to you, the embodiment of the primordial wisdom of
yeshe chikdü pakma khyö la
All the victorious ones and their spiritual heirs,
nying né güpé solwa deb so
Noble lady, I pray with heartfelt devotion,
changchub bardu jesu zung shik
Take care of me until enlightenment.

damchö drubpé galkyen shyi shying
Pacify all circumstances that prevent the accomplishment of the sacred Dharma.
tsé sö paljor rik dang tsewé
And grant your blessings, so that with long life, merit, splendour, knowledge, love,
tünkyen malü pünsum tsokpé
All favourable conditions in abundance,
dön nyi drubpar jingyi lob shik
I may accomplish the twofold benefit―for myself and others.

Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, who has one-pointed, heartfelt devotion for the supreme female deity,
composed this prayer. May it be accomplished accordingly!

| Translated by Ane Tsöndrü, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "'phags ma sgrol ma la rtsa sngags dang sbyar pa'i sgo nas
gsol ba 'debs pa don kun grub pa'i dbyangs snyan" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/.
TBRC W21807. 24 vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 1: 97–99